#### 4.1.1 Classes

Initial discussion about encapsulation. Our classes must hide their information (properties and method implementations) by encapsulating them. The book calls it `"black box" behavior`: the user does not need to know the state of an object or how its class implements a method, it just needs to do what it is supposed to do.

To make encapsulation work, programs should interact with object data only through the object's methods. If an object’s state changes without a method call, there's something wrong with our class's encapsulation logic.

#### 4.1.4 Relationships between Classes

Most common relationships between classes are:
- Dependence ("uses-a")
- Aggregation("has-a")
- Inheritance("is-a")

##### Dependence ("uses-a")
The most obvious one. In the context of an order-processing system, the `Order` class uses the `Account` class because `Order` objects need to access `Account` objects to check for credit status.

Thus, a class depends on another class if its methods use or manipulate objects of that class, but it does not own them or maintain a long-term relationship.

This is a weak, temporary relationship, usually happening during a method call.

Example:

```java
class Order {
    public void process(Account account) {
        // Order depends on Account to do its job
        if (account.hasSufficientCredit(this)) {
            // Process it
        } else {
	        // Do something
        }
    }
}
```

##### Aggregation ("has-a")
A class aggregates another class if it contains references to objects that can still exist independently, even if the container is destroyed.

Example:

```java
class Order {
	private List<Item> items;
	
	public Order(List<Item> items) {
		this.items = items;
	}
}
```

##### Inheritance ("is-a")
A class inherits from another class when it reuses its attributes and behaviors, and may also define new attributes or override behaviors.

Example:

```java
class Order {
	public void process(Account account) {
		// Process
	}
}

class RushOrder extends Order {
	private Date expirationDate;
	
	@Override
	public void process(Account account) {
		// Process with priority
	}
}
```