When you package your application, you want to give your users a single file, not a directory structure filled with class files. Java Archive (JAR) files were designed for this purpose. A JAR file can contain both class files and other file types such as image and sound files. Moreover, JAR files are compressed, using the ZIP compression format.

##### 4.9.1 Creating JAR files

Use the `jar` tool to make JAR files. The most common command to make a new JAR file uses the following syntax:

```bash
jar cvf jarFileName file1 file2 ...
```

You can package application programs and code libraries into JAR files. For example, if you want to send mail in a Java program, you use a library that is packaged in a file javax.mail.jar.

##### 4.9.3 Executable JAR Files

You can use the `e` option of the jar command to specify the entry point of your program (the class that you would normally specify when invoking the java program launcher):
```bash
jar cvfe MyProgram.jar com.mycompany.mypkg.MainAppClass files to add
```

With that, users can simply start the program as:
```bash
java -jar MyProgram.jar
```

Depending on the operating system configuration, users may even be able to launch the application by double-clicking the JAR file icon.

##### 4.9.4 Multi-Release JAR Files

With the introduction of modules and strong encapsulation of packages, some previously accessible internal APIs are no longer available. This may require library providers to distribute different code for different Java versions. Multi-release JARs take care of this use case.

For backward compatibility, version-specific class files are placed in the META-INF/ versions directory:

```
Application.class
BuildingBlocks.class
Util.class
META-INF/
 ├── MANIFEST.MF
 └── versions
     ├── 9
         ├── Application.class
         └── BuildingBlocks.class
     └── 10
         └── BuildingBlocks.class
```

Suppose the Application class makes use of the CssParser class. Then the legacy Application.class file can be compiled to use `com.sun.javafx.css.CssParser`, while the Java 9 version uses `javafx.css.CssParser`.

*Note: Java 8 knows nothing about the META-INF/ versions directory and will simply load the legacy classes.*

To add versioned class files, use the `--release` flag:
```bash
jar uf MyProgram.jar --release 9 Application.class
```