The `ArrayList` class is similar to an array, but it automatically adjusts its capacity as you add and remove elements, without any additional code.

`ArrayList` is a _generic class_ with a _type parameter_. To specify the type of the element objects that the array list holds, you append a class name enclosed in angle brackets, such as `ArrayList<Employee>.

#### 5.3.1 Declaring Array Lists

Here is how to declare and construct an array list that holds `Employee` objects:
```java
ArrayList<Employee> staff = new ArrayList<Employee>();
```

It is a good idea to use the `var` keyword to avoid duplicating the class name:
```java
var staff = new ArrayList<Employee>();
```

If you don't use the `var` keyword, you can omit the type argument on the right-hand side:
```java
ArrayList<Employee> staff = new ArrayList<>();
```

> Note: This is called the "diamond" syntax because the empty brackets `<>` resemble a diamond.

> Note 2: Before Java 5, there were no generic classes. Instead, there was a single `ArrayList` class, a one-size-fits-all collection holding elements of type `Object`.

> Note 3: In even older versions of Java, programmers used the `Vector` class for dynamic arrays. However, the `ArrayList` class is more efficient, and there is no longer any good reason to use the `Vector` class.

The array list manages an internal array of object references. Eventually, that array will run out of space. This is where array lists work their magic: If you call `add` and the internal array is full, the array list automatically creates a bigger array and copies all the objects from the smaller to the bigger array.