Occasionally, you need to convert a primitive type like `int` to an object. All primitive types have class counterparts. For example, a class `Integer` corresponds to the primitive type `int`. These kinds of classes are usually called _wrappers_.

Suppose we want an array list of integers. Unfortunately, the type argument inside the angle brackets cannot be a primitive type. It is not possible to form an `ArrayList<int>`. Here, the `Integer` wrapper class comes in:
```java
var list = new ArrayList<Integer>();
```

Fortunately, there is a useful feature that makes it easy to add an element of type `int` to and `ArrayList<Integer>`. The call
```java
list.add(3);
```
is automatically translated to
```java
list.add(Integer.valueOf(3));
```
This conversion is called _autoboxing_.

In most cases, you get the illusion that the primitive types and their wrappers are one and the same. There is just one point in which they differ considerably: identity. As you know, the `==` operator, applied to wrapper objects, only tests whether the objects have identical memory locations.

However, a Java implementation _may_, if it chooses, wrap commonly occurring values into identical objects, and thus the comparison might succeed. This ambiguity is not what you want. The remedy is to call the equals method when comparing wrapper objects.

Finally, let us emphasize that boxing and unboxing is a courtesy of the _compiler_, not the virtual machine. The compiler inserts the necessary calls when it generates the bytecodes of a class. The virtual machine simply executes those bytecodes.

You will often see the number wrappers for another reason. The designers of Java found the wrappers a convenient place to put certain basic methods, such as those for converting strings of digits to numbers.

To convert a string to an integer, use the following statement:
```java
int x = Integer.parseInt(s);
```

This has nothing to do with `Integer` objects: `parseInt` is a static Method. But the `Integer` class was a good place to put it.

The wrapper classes also define constants. For all integral wrapper types, `MIN_VALUE` and `MAX_VALUE` are the smallest and largest value of the type. For example, `Integer.MIN_VALUE` is `-2147483648`, and `Integer.MAX_VALUE` is `2147483647`.